Words to Delight the Lake-Born One
A Prayer for the Spread of the Vajrayāna Teachings of the Ancient Translations
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

namo guru pemakaraya
Namo guru padmākarāya!

dü sum gyalwa tamché düpé ngö
The actual embodiment of all the victorious ones of the three times,
khyen tsé nü pé yönten kha dang nyam
Whose qualities of knowledge, love and power are as vast as space,
pur drö lobpön pema jungné kyi
Teacher to all who soar and roam about, Ācārya Padmasambhava—
ringluk dar zhing gyepé shipa tsol
Grant auspiciousness, so your tradition may flourish and spread.

khyé ni sangye nam dang gongpa chik
You are the equal of the buddhas in your realized intent,
yidam kyilkhor gyatso trodü dak
A master from whom oceanic maṇḍalas of yidam deities emanate and into whom they are reabsorbed.
khandro yong kyi mingpo pawo gyal
A brother to all ḍākinīs, sovereign of all vīras,
dorjé tötreng jinlab terdzö ché
Vajra Skull-Garland, a great treasury of blessings,
nyida norbu paksam shing zhindu
Comparable to the sun and moon, a wish-fulfilling jewel or wish-granting tree,
choktün ngödrub jungné pendé yik
A source of supreme and ordinary attainments, a treasure of benefit and happiness,
si sum drowa kün gyi tsuk gi gyen
An adornment for the crowns of all the beings of the three worlds—
gang gi ringluk nyi tar sal gyur chik
May your tradition shine as resplendently as the sun.

dong mar böyul münpé ling nyi du
In this benighted country of the red-faced people, Tibet,
lhasin dam tak tenpé shingta dren
You bound gods and spirits under oath and introduced the chariot of the teachings.
khen lob chögyal bai ro ka chok gang
Abbot, teacher and dharma-king, Vairotsana, Kawa Paltsek and Chokro Lüi Gyaltsen,
drub nyé khedrub rigdzin tsok nam kyi
And hosts of learned and accomplished vidyādharas who had gained attainments,
tukkyé kawé tsal zhing gyur shé dang
All with enlightened resolve, painstakingly sought, translated and taught,
chenyen gom drub tsemé drubpa yi
Establishing the validity, through study and through practice,
dul do ngönpa sang ngak chinang gi
Of the precious teachings of the Vinaya, Sūtra, Abhidharma,
tenpa rinchen dar zhing gyé gyur chik
And the outer and inner collections of Secret Mantra—may they flourish and spread.

khyepar kal mang tsen tsam tö kawé
Even across many aeons, it is rare to hear the names of
nangpa naljor tab kyi gyü chenpö
The great tantras of the inner yogic methods, in particular—
nyingpo gyutrul dü do sem chok kyi
The Essence of Illusory Display, the Sūtra of Gathering, and Area of the Mind.1
gyü shé wang kadampé mengak nam
Seeing the extremely fragile state of the transmission lineages
shintu nyak trar gyurpa dir zik né
Of their explanation, empowerment and pith instructions,
khyen tob tukjé nüpé tsal truk té
Intensify the power of your wisdom, compassion and skill,
rigdzin trulpé ku chok khyepar chen
And cause vidyādharas and sublime nirmāṇakāya emanations
kha lé tok bab zhindu jönpar dzö
To appear, just like bolts of lightning descending from the sky.

jampal pawö yeshe nying la zhuk
With the wisdom of the warrior Mañjuśrī in our hearts,
chenrezik kyi tsewé chen dangden
The tender loving gaze of Avalokiteśvara,
sang dzin wangpö nüpé tu nyepé
And the strength and capacity of the mighty Keeper of Secrets,2
ngagyur tenpé mé ro long gyur chik
May we rekindle the dying embers of the Ancient Translation teachings.

ngejung tsultrim denpé tsünpa dang
May the ranks of the ordained saṅgha who possess renunciation and discipline
rim nyi damden sang ngakchang ba yi
And of the secret mantra practitioners who maintain the samayas of the two stages
dé nyi ma drö tso chen tar gyé té
Both expand like the great lake of Manasarovar.
tsarchö jedzin chi yi rigpé né
The outer sciences of refutation and maintenance,
zabmo nang gi dön rik zhungluk ché
The great textual tradition of the profound inner science,
jangchok shé gyün dekpé ka chen chü
And scripture and reasoning based on threefold analysis
ché sum dakpé lung rik chö nga drok
From the ten great pillars who supported the exegetical tradition in this northern land—
kabab chuwo nam zhi gyé gyur chik
May the drum of Dharma resound and the four river-like transmissions flourish.

shintu zabpa kün dang tünmong min
May the jewel-like material and Dharma treasures
khandrö nyingtrak ter gyi gyü dzinpé
Of the great vidyādharas with miraculous powers,
dzutrul tsal chang rigdzin chenpo nam
Who appeared in the past and who will come in future,
ngar yang jön dang lé né jön gyur gyi
Upholding the lineage of extremely profound, uncommon treasures,
dzé dang chö ter norbü dram bur dal
The ḍākinīs’ heart-blood, be widely disseminated,
ten drö güpa tamché selwa dang
Dispelling all the ills that plague the teachings and beings.
choktün ngödrub nyepé sateng kheng
May those who attain supreme and common siddhis fill the earth,
maha gurü tenpa gyé gyur chik
And may the teachings of the Mahāguru spread far and wide.

yichö tekpé drubté trang lé gal
By transcending the limited tenets of the eight speculative vehicles,
sem kyi dü drol rigpa ku sum gyi
As mental knots are released, may the realization of three-kāya awareness
gongpé tsal dzok chö kün rang sar drol
Reach full strength and all dharmas be freed in their own place.
ösal drönma zhi yi seng lam né
Then, through the direct approach of the four lamps of luminosity,
kadak tongchen chökü longchen por
In the vast dharmakāya expanse of primordially pure great emptiness,
lhündrub ku dang yeshe tsombu tra
May the spontaneously perfect clusters of kāyas and wisdoms appear clearly,
nangwa zhi yi lam gyi patar chin
And may we reach the culmination of the path of the four visions.
rigpa chü min dorjé ku nyepé
Through gaining the vajrakāya that is the maturation of awareness,
gangchen ri yi sul künkhyab pa dang
May our impact extend throughout every valley in the Land of Snows,
jikme dorjé gegyang drokpa yi
And with the roaring laughter of vajra fearlessness,
pé gol chenzen tumpo tadak chom
May we triumph over all the savage beasts who are our adversaries.
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May the teachings of the Lake-born Buddha flourish and spread.

mengak gyatsö chuter chenpo lé
May the great waves of the four types of activity
trinlé nam zhi ba lab cher yöpé
Emerge out of the vast, oceanic treasury of pith instructions,
künkhyen tubpé tenpa pel zhing gyé
Causing the teachings of the Omniscient Sage to flourish and spread,
khakhyab semchen dekyi gyé gyur chik
And may the happiness of beings throughout the whole of space forever increase.

ngagyur shingté pal lé drangpa yi
Encouraged by the glories of the Ancient Translations school,
kadam sakya mar shang kagyü dang
May those who uphold the teaching and practice of the Kadam, Sakya,
geden zhi chö jo zhal lasokpa
Marpa and Shangpa Kagyü, Gendenpa, Pacifying, Chöd, Jonang, Zhalu
shedrub dzin nam tenpa dargyé shok
And other traditions help their own systems to flourish and spread.

dorna ngön jön gyal lön changsem dang
In short, through the enlightened resolve of the kings, ministers,
trulpé lo pen nam kyi tukkyé kyi
Bodhisattvas and emanated lotsāwas and paṇḍitas of the past,
jitar mönpa zhindu drubpa dang
May all that we be accomplished in accordance with our wishes,
orgyen gurü tenpa dargyé shok
And may the teachings of the Oḍḍiyāna Guru flourish and spread.

zhenyang rimé tenpa dar zhing gyé
Moreover, may all be auspicious for the nonsectarian teachings to spread,
tendzin kyechok zhabpé tenpa dang
The lives of the sublime beings who uphold the teachings to remain secure,
gendün tuktün jindak tsesö gyé
The saṅgha to live in harmony, the merit and longevity of patrons to increase,
dü kyi güpa malü kün zhi zhing
All the various ills of this age without exception to be pacified,
kha la dzokden sarpé nyizhön char
The fresh sun heralding a golden dawn to rise within the sky,
sa la ngotsar pemé gatsal gyé
Lotus gardens of wonder to flourish everywhere upon the earth,
bardu gelek pal gyi jorpa yi
The atmosphere to be enriched by splendours of virtuous excellence,
tenpa mi nub dargyé tashi shok
And the teachings never to decline but to flourish and spread far and wide.

Thus, Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso wrote this aspiration for the spread of the teachings at the request—supported
by a divine silk scarf—of Parkö Chöpel, on the excellent day that commemorates
the trio of Abbot, Ācārya and Dharma-king. Sarvadā maṅgalam. Śubhaṃ.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "snga 'gyur rdo rje theg pa'i bstan pa rgyas pa'i smon
lam mtsho skyes dgyes pa'i zhal lung/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum.
12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol. 12: 295–300

Version: 1.0-20220328
↑ I.e., Guhyagarbha-Māyājāla (sgyu 'phrul drwa ba), Sūtra of the Gathering of Intentions (mdo
dgongs pa 'dus pa) and the Great Perfection Area of the Mind (rdzogs chen sems phyogs),
the scriptures that are representative of the Mahāyoga, Anuyoga and Atiyoga. These are commonly
referred to as mdo sgyu sems gsum.↑ That is, Vajrapāṇi.