Music to Delight the Victorious Ones and Their Heirs
A Mahāyāna Aspiration
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

namo guru
Namo guru!
dorjé lama rigdzin tsok nam dang
I pray that the vajra gurus, hosts of vidyādharas,
yidam drub tek daki chökyong tsok
Yidams who support accomplishment, ḍākinīs and dharmapālas
dak gi jitar mönpa di zhindu
All bear witness to the pure fulfilment
namdak drubpé pangpo dzé du sol
Of these, my prayers of aspiration, just as I wish.

tsé di mi tak tsa tsé zilpa dra
This life is as impermanent as a dewdrop on a blade of grass;
donub sang yang namchi chamé pé
There’s even a chance that I might die tonight or tomorrow.
sipé püntsok kün la zhenlok té
Inspire me, therefore, to end my craving for all the riches of this world
ngejung tingné kyewar jingyi lob
And develop, from deep within, a determination to be free.

tarpé lam gyi zhima tsultrim kyi
As it is the foundation for the path to liberation,
sa zhi tsangma jidor lek jé né
Inspire me to cleanse the basis of ethical discipline,
tungwa dé nga tra rak dang chepé
And never to let it be corrupted in any way
namyang göpa mepar jingyi lob
By the five types of downfall,1 however slight.

zhenpen changchub sem kyi norbu la
Inspire me, so that the jewel of altruistic bodhicitta
rangdön yi jé tokpa ngenpa yi
May remain unsullied by base thoughts of self-interest,
ma lé tongnyi nyingjé nyingpochen
And emptiness of which compassion is the very essence
nyurdu gyü la kyewar jingyi lob
May swiftly take hold within my stream of being.

tsennyi tsangwé dorjé lobpön lé
May my mindstream be ripened by pure empowerment
namdak wang gi dak gyü min jé né
Received from a fully qualified vajra master,
damtsik nyenpo tsulzhin sungwa yi
And, by genuinely maintaining the solemn samaya pledges,
dorjé lam chok normé nyé gyur chik
May I unerringly adopt the supreme path of Vajrayāna.

kyé dang dzokpé tamal nang zhen dom
Through generation and perfection, may I control my clinging to perception as ordinary,
pung kham tsa lung tiklé drawa kün
And, bringing the entire web of aggregates, elements, channels, energies and essences
shintu namdak duldral ösal du
To maturity within utterly pure and immaculate luminosity,
min né gyurmé dechen tar sön shok
May I perfect the great bliss that is immutable.

nyelam zabmö lamé rimpa yi
Through the swift approach, the profound stage of guru practice,
nyukmé sem la jingyi lob pa dang
May I blessed with insight into the genuine nature of mind,
khakhyab dorjé yeshe kha chenpo
And realize, just as it is, without any error,
manor jizhin ngönsum tokpar shok
The vast wisdom sky of all-pervasive vajra wisdom.

kyewa küntu lama dorjé chang
Throughout all my lives to come, may I gain certainty
tsa sum dü zhal chenpor ngeshé nyé
That the guru is Vajradhara, great face and embodiment of the Three Roots,
chömin mögü nang né kyewa dang
May uncontrived devotion arise from deep within,
rang dré dangpö sangye tobpar shok
And may I attain the original buddhahood that is its own effect.

sipa jisi né kyi bar dak tu
For as long as conditioned existence continues to endure,
changchub sempé lü zang la ten né
By adopting the excellent form of a bodhisattva,
tayé drowé dön nam drubpa la
May I perfect the aspirations of the heroic Mañjuśrī
jampal pawö mönlam dzokpar shok
To accomplish the welfare of beings in their infinity.2

khyepar ngabgyé tamar ten dro la
During this final era of five hundred years in particular,
tsewé jungpo mi dang mi min nam
When human and non-human forces harm the teachings and beings,
nyingjé drakpor tröpé tobshuk kyi
May I have the strength of compassion’s intense wrath
dü kyi dé tsok chemar tak jé shok
And smash the legions of Māra to smithereens.

gangzhik tachö ngenpé tsa bur nam
With the great fire of scripture and reasoning,
nam mang lung dang rigpé zhuk chen gyi
May I be able to set alight in a single instant
kechik tsam la sek né yangdak gi
The straw and chaff of erroneous views and conduct,
ta gom chöpa trulmé sal nü shok
And illuminate the unmistaken view, meditation and action.

ngön jön jowo yabsé namtar dang
May I adopt the lifestyle of the great Jowo and his heirs,3
chakdzok drubpé lobpön ché nam kyi
Become proficient in all the enlightened deeds
dzepa jinyé kün la wangjor té
Of the accomplished masters of Mahāmudrā and Dzogchen
gyalwé ten la jawa jepar shok
And be of service to the teachings of the Victorious Ones!

dorna changchub chöpé mönlam nam
In short, may I thoroughly and perfectly accomplish
malü dak gi gyü la yongsu dzok
All the aspirations of bodhisattva conduct without exception,
namzhik khorwa tongpar gyurpé tsé
And, in time, when saṃsāra is eventually emptied,
kunzang chökü long du tim gyur chik
Merge into the dharmakāya expanse of Samantabhadra.

This aspiration was made by Chökyi Lodrö during the second autumnal month of the Wood Dog year.
May it be accomplished just so!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "theg chen smon lam sras bcas rgyal ba dgyes pa'i rol
mo/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986. Vol. 12: 269–271

Version: 1.0-20220326
↑ That is, 'defeats' entailing expulsion (pham pa), downfalls entailing suspension (lhag ma),
minor transgressions (ltung byed), confessable transgressions (sor bshags), and small infractions
(nyes byas).↑ Reading mthar yas as mtha’ yas.↑ That is, Atiśa and his principal
disciples.