Aspiration Prayer1
by Patrul Rinpoche

kyabné luwa mepé könchok sum
Unfailing sources of refuge, the Three Jewels,
tukjé tsungmé tsa gyü lamé tsok
And hosts of root and lineage gurus, whose kindness is beyond compare,
nying né solwa deb so jingyi lob
I pray to you from the depths of my heart: inspire me with your blessings.
taktu yelwa mepar tukjé zung
Always hold me in your compassion without ever wavering.

mögü lam gyi tsawar shepa yi
In the knowledge that devotion lie at the root of the path,
jam dang nyingjé lam gyi zhi zung né
As I take love and compassion as the path’s foundation,
kyedzok rim nyi tsönpé lhurlen tsé
And diligently apply myself to the twin stages of generation and completion,
chok sum lamé taktu tukjé zik
May the Three Jewels and the gurus always watch over me with compassion.

wenpa sum gyi naljor zhir zung né
As I take the yoga of threefold solitude as a foundation,
dorjé sum gyi nyamlen lek tsön tsé
And thoroughly exert myself in the practice of the three vajras,
galkyen kün zhi tünkyen püntsok né
May all adversity be pacified and favourable conditions abound,
nyam dang tokpé yönten pelwar shok
And may I develop the qualities of experience and realization.

tawa zabmö neluk tokpa dang
With the profound view of realizing the natural state,
gompa zabmö nyamnyong pün sum tsok
Profound meditation in which experience is plentiful,
chöpa zangpo chin druk la ten né
And excellent conduct of the six transcendent perfections,
gyalwa gyepé lam la lobpar shok
May I train in the path that delights the victorious ones.

chöjé lama künkhyen yabsé kyi
May the virtue and excellence that spring from the noble deeds
dzepa zangpö gelek gongpel né
Of the guru, lord of Dharma, the omniscient one and his heirs, increase.
shé dang drubpé tenpa rinpoche
And may the precious teachings, in explanation and in practice,
yar ngö da tar gong du pelwar shok
Flourish and increase ever further just like the waxing moon!

May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2022.

Source: rdza dpal sprul o rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po. gsung 'bum o rgyan 'jigs med chos
kyi dbang po. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2003. Vol. 8: 64–65.

Version: 1.1-20220425
↑ The original is untitled; this title has been added by the translator.